---
layout: post
title:  "Dignity and Resentment"
date:   2019-03-17 11:23:59 -0600
category: life
description: "Learning while feeding yourself and your family."
---
The world can seem as if everyone else, or at least everyone else who matters to
you, has all the luck. These people got the violin lessons; those people got the
private tutors; those other people had the talent or the grace to get into
Stanford or Harvard; oh, and don't forget the people who got internships at
Google or Apple or Amazon.

Meanwhile, you dropped out of college because, well, you don't really know, but
maybe you didn't quite know why you were there, and your family didn't have
enough money; or you got in over your head with your classes or with adjusting
to life at college, and were too freaked out to tell anyone; or your little
brother got sick and you had to find a job so he could get healthcare and not
die; or you got married and had a kid--it seemed like a good idea at the
time--but Mr.  Husband is now Mr. Ex-Husband and is gone and you have a child or
two, and sometimes it's so fucking hard your head could explode but also you've
discovered that now you love something more than you ever believed possible, so
that's your life now.

So, whatever, that's your life now. But, you're reading this blog. You want to
become an engineer; maybe you went to a boot camp, or maybe miraculously scraped
up enough money to spend a semester or two at a university, and fell in love
with programming. _There is so much to learn_, and it's not so much that you
don't know where to begin as you don't know where you're going to find the time
and the emotional energy to spend on focusing on something like that. Maybe you
have a full-time job doing something else (possibly that job is taking care of
your kids, or maybe you're doing that, too, on top of your job). So: WHEN THE
FUCK AM I GOING TO FIND TIME TO DO THIS?

First, let me assure you right now: you can do this. Take a few deep breaths.
You're going to be fine.

Second, given that your time is precious, you need to figure out how you're
going to spend it. I have a bit of advice that may sound weird and may sound a
bit presumptuous, but I think it's pretty good advice and think you should take
it to heart. Here's the advice: before doing anything else _get your shit
together_.

## Wait, what? What does "Get my shit together?" even mean?

If you are a human being, you have problems. Those problems have helped shape
the person you are, for good and for ill. But you likely have some problems that
are getting in the way of you becoming the person you want to be. This isn't a
hostile judgment--_everyone_ is like this to some extent. The thing is that what
you want involves a _major change_ in your life. 






The most important thing, THE MOST IMPORTANT THING, is this: keep moving
forward. Continue to study, continue to improve yourself, even if it's just one
small thing every week. Keep at the work.

Sometimes you will feel bone-deep awful, sometimes you will feel overwhelmed,
sometimes you will feel like the goals aren't worth the effort you put in,
sometimes you will feel utterly defeated. All of this is normal; everyone--even
the blessed Stanford grads in their shiny Google offices, smiling from their
Instagram posts--feel this way sometimes. And everyone feels like this sometimes
for reasons that _seem perfectly valid to them_.



